docs/simple.rst, before:

Simple project structure
========================
The simple project structure and workflow are suitable for projects where no
more than 1 developer works on the project at the same time. The workflow
assures high quality by automated tests and checklists.

The following are guidelines. Feel free to deviate from them when it makes
sense to do so.

Code repository usage
---------------------
There is one repository on GitLab or GitHub. Simply clone it and push your
changes directly.

Consider using a branch named 'next' to push your changes to before merging
them onto master. This way you can rebase and force push to the next branch
while never having to force push to the master branch. As such the master
branch's history never changes and can be relied on.

We'll refer to the directory that is created when cloning the repository as the
project root.

Each commit should change/achieve one thing (not too fine grained though). If
you've made many changes without committing, try separating them with ``git
add -i`` using the patch command, into multiple commits.

Tip: better commit too often than too little, it's easier to squash than to
split commits in a rebase.

Versioning
----------
Use `semantic versioning <http://semver.org/>`_.

Version tags needn't begin with ``v``, just be consistent.  Historically the v
prefix was used for version tags because tags had to be valid identifiers, i.e.
had to start with alphabetic character. (`Source`__)

.. __: http://stackoverflow.com/questions/2006265/is-there-a-standard-naming-convention-for-git-tags


Testing
-------
Features that need to have assured quality should be covered by automated
tests. `pytest` is used as testing framework. To run tests, run ``py.test`` in
the project root.

To generate test coverage info, use ``py.test --cov``. For this to work, all
tests should be run and the should be ran sequentially. E.g. when using
``pytest-xdist``, add ``-n0`` to run without xdist.

Tests are located in ``$pkg/tests``. For example, for the ``subproject``
project below, which only provides packages starting with
``project.subproject``, its file tree would look like::

    project
        __init__.py
        subproject
            __init__.py
            algorithms
                __init__.py
                algorithm.py
                algorithm2.py
            util.py
            tests
                __init__.py
                conftest.py
                test_algorithms.py
                test_util.py

There is only one ``tests`` package, under which all tests can be found. They
can be organised as you see fit, e.g. the following is fine too::

    tests
        __init__.py
        conftest.py
        algorithms
            __init__.py
            test_algorithm1.py
            test_algorithm2.py
        test_util.py

Documenting
-----------
Documentation is written as `reStructuredText`_ files (.rst) located in
``docs``. These get compiled by `Sphinx`_ into HTML, PDF and epub. When a
commit is added to the master on GitLab/GitHub, `Read the Docs (RTD) <rtd_>`_
is notified and starts a build of the documentation with Sphinx, after which it
hosts the result on its website, as the 'latest' version.  The Sphinx
configuration file is ``docs/conf.py``.

Read the Docs can be configured per project on https://readthedocs.io or for
most options (but not all) in ``readthedocs.yml`` in the project root.

To generate html documentation locally, run ``cd docs; make clean html``. The output
is in ``build/html``. The makefile also has targets for latex and other
formats.

Developing
----------
Work test-driven for the parts that will need testing eventually, this saves
the work of manually testing the code. You should run the tests occasionally
and avoid pushing commits to master with failing tests. It's okay to commit
with failing tests if you intend to rebase later to fix those commits.

Dependencies should at least be constrained to their major version to avoid
breakage in the future. After all, a project's major version is bumped iff
there is a backwards-incompatible change, which may break the project. For
example ``install_requires=['dep==1.*']``.

Tip: Instead of ``dep2>=1.1``, write ``dep2~=1.1``, this is equivalent to
``dep2>=1.1, dep2==1.*``.

To _`set up your local development environment`:

1. ``git clone $github_or_gitlab_url``
2. It's recommended to be in a Python virtual environment while developing.
   This hides all system/user-wide installed packages, amongst other things
   this helps test for missing dependencies in ``setup.py``.

   To create one::

       cd $project_root
       python -m venv venv  # create venv. Be sure to use the python version you want to test with, e.g. python3.5

   To enter the venv use ``. venv/bin/activate``, to exit ``deactivate``. When
   using Eclipse PyDev, you can configure a new interpreter on the project
   which points to the venv instead of the system-wide interpreter (which makes
   for better hinting of missing imports).
   
   It's a good idea to install ``wheel`` (speeds up installation by using
   binaries when available) and upgrade ``setuptools`` and ``pip``::

       pip install -U pip setuptools wheel

3. Install the project editably::

       pip install -e '.[all]'

   This also installs the dependencies. The -e option installs it in such a way
   that changes to the code will be reflected in the installed package, so you
   don't have to reinstall each time you want to use a script provided by the
   package. ``[all]`` tells pip to install the ``all`` extras, which in case of
   our ``setup.py`` contains the union of all extra dependencies.

   However, when changing ``install_requires``, ``extras_require`` or
   ``entry_points`` in ``setup.py``, you should reinstall (by rerunning the
   above command)

Code guidelines:

- Docstrings must follow
  `NumPy style <https://github.com/numpy/numpy/blob/master/doc/HOWTO_DOCUMENT.rst.txt#sections>`_.

- Be precise when specifying expected types in docstrings, e.g. in the
  ``Parameters`` section. E.g. consider using a type language like the one used
  in `Chicken Turtle Utilities`__.

- When using someone else's code or idea, give credit in a comment in the
  source file, not in the documentation, unless on a separate acknowledgements
  page.

__ http://chicken-turtle-util.readthedocs.io/en/4.1.0/type_language.html

Commit guidelines:

- Ensure ``py.test`` passes. If not, fix or mention tests are failing in the
  commit message (e.g. ``[failing]``, ``[broken]``).

- Remove trailing whitespace, unless it is significant. E.g. you cannot remove
  the trailing whitespace on the empty line in the string given to dedent::

      dedent('''\
          First line

          Last'''
      )

  By removing trailing whitespace one cause of git merge conflicts where
  semantically nothing has changed, is prevented. Command line git will
  highlight trailing whitespace. Most editors/IDEs can be configured to show
  trailing whitespace (Google ``$editor show trailing whitespace``).

Release checklist
-----------------
To release a new version to `PyPI`_:

1. Ensure your working tree is clean and you are on the master branch::

       git checkout master && git status

   Otherwise you risk including files/changes in the package uploaded to PyPI
   that are not in the git repo.

2. Ensure tests pass (``py.test``) in a fresh venv which does not rely on
   unreleased dependencies (i.e. no ``pip -e ...``).

3. Update changelog in ``docs/changelog.rst`` by reviewing commit messages since
   last release.

   The changelog is mainly intended to answer:

   - Which version do I need given that I use feature X?
   - Something is broken, could this be due to a recent update?
   - What's new? What features got added that I may want to use?

   Suggested sections:

   - Backwards incompatible changes:

     - Removal of anything that's part of the public interface, e.g. function
       of an API
     - Any other breaking changes to the public interface 

   - Enhancements/additions:

     - Addition of function, parameter, ... to public interface
     - Change that improves a function, ... of the public interface
     - Anything non-breaking that is part of the public interface

   - Fixes:

     - Bug fix to anything that affects the public interface. Briefly describe
       the symptoms of the bug and the fix.

   - Internal / implementation details:

     - switching to different libraries
     - non-trivial changes to project structure
     - anything related to tests
     - fixes that do not affect the public interface
     - anything not part of the public interface. This section is more so
       intended for developers. It's debatable whether this section is
       necessary, you might indeed just use the commit log.

4. Set the version for the release (semantic versioning: bump major iff
   backwards incompatible change, else bump minor if enhancement/addition, else
   bump patch; refer to the changelog)

   1. in ``setup.py``
   2. in the ``__init__.py`` of the package, e.g. for a subproject in
      ``project/subproject/__init__.py``

5. Generate documentation locally and review all changed areas (git diff of
   docs since last tag)::
   
       cd docs
       make clean html
       firefox build/html/index.html

   Common errors:

   - Formatting errors?
   - Dead links? (feel free to use a tool for finding dead links instead)
   - Unfinished parts?

6. Point documentation link to tagged RTD release by changing ``latest`` to
   ``$version``.

7. Push tagged commit with the changes::

       git commit -am $version
       git push
       git tag $version
       git push origin $version

8. Activate the version just released at `RTD <rtd projects_>`_, see the
   Versions tab.

9. Release to `PyPI`_::
   
       python setup.py sdist bdist_wheel
       twine upload dist/*

   - At first glance, looks correct
   - Homepage link is not dead
   - Documentation link links to tagged version at RTD

   Tip: ``~/.pypirc`` can be used to avoid retyping your password each time,
   chmod it to 0600

10. Bump patch and dev version (e.g. 4.0.0 -> 4.0.1.dev1, because 4.0.0.dev <
    4.0.0), and point documentation link back to latest RTD. Then
    ``git commit -am $dev_version && git push``.

Deploying
---------
In your development virtual environment, run::

    pip freeze > requirements.txt

Copy this to the production environment, create a new venv and then run::

    pip install -r requirements.txt

This reduces the odds of bugs due to having installed different versions of
dependencies. Alternatively, if you have high test coverage, you can just install and run the
tests. Also note that a venv cannot be moved (it uses absolute paths), you have
to recreate it on the new location.

Creating a new project
----------------------
To create a new project with this structure:

1. Install cookiecutter: ``pip install cookiecutter``.

2. Create the project from the cookiecutter template::

       git clone https://github.com/timdiels/python-project
       cookiecutter python-project/cookiecutters/simple
       rm -rf python-project  # when satisfied with the generated project

   and cd into the created directory (``$pypi_name``).

3. Initialize git and push first commit to GitHub/GitLab::

       git init
       git add .
       git commit -m 'Initial commit'
       git remote add origin $repo_url
       git push -u origin master

4. Enable documentation builds for the project on `Read the Docs <rtd
   projects_>`_.

   1. Import the project from GitHub/GitLab. Make an account and
      link it to your GitHub/GitLab if you haven't already.

   2. Go to ``Admin > Advanced settings`` and check "Install your project
      inside a virtualenv using setup.py install". This allows access to the
      project's code from within conf.py and the documentation (e.g.
      for using autodoc directives).

      As requirements file, enter ``rtd_requirements.txt``. RTD will ``pip
      install -r rtd_requirements.txt``. The ``rtd_requirements.txt`` of the
      template references the optional dev dependencies, so you can forget
      about this file and add doc dependencies to ``extras_require['dev']`` in
      ``setup.py``.

      If only supporting Python 3, change the interpreter to CPython3 (or
      similar implementation).

5. To start development, `set up your local development environment`_.

.. _pytest: https://pytest.org
.. _rtd: https://readthedocs.org
.. _rtd projects: https://readthedocs.org/dashboard
.. _pypi: https://pypi.python.org
.. _reStructuredText: http://docutils.sourceforge.net/docs/user/rst/quickref.html
.. _sphinx: http://www.sphinx-doc.org

Commit message:

Ensure that docs/conf.py is in sync with setup.py on release

docs/simple.rst, after:

Simple project structure
========================
The simple project structure and workflow are suitable for projects where no
more than 1 developer works on the project at the same time. The workflow
assures high quality by automated tests and checklists.

The following are guidelines. Feel free to deviate from them when it makes
sense to do so.

Code repository usage
---------------------
There is one repository on GitLab or GitHub. Simply clone it and push your
changes directly.

Consider using a branch named 'next' to push your changes to before merging
them onto master. This way you can rebase and force push to the next branch
while never having to force push to the master branch. As such the master
branch's history never changes and can be relied on.

We'll refer to the directory that is created when cloning the repository as the
project root.

Each commit should change/achieve one thing (not too fine grained though). If
you've made many changes without committing, try separating them with ``git
add -i`` using the patch command, into multiple commits.

Tip: better commit too often than too little, it's easier to squash than to
split commits in a rebase.

Versioning
----------
Use `semantic versioning <http://semver.org/>`_.

Version tags needn't begin with ``v``, just be consistent.  Historically the v
prefix was used for version tags because tags had to be valid identifiers, i.e.
had to start with alphabetic character. (`Source`__)

.. __: http://stackoverflow.com/questions/2006265/is-there-a-standard-naming-convention-for-git-tags


Testing
-------
Features that need to have assured quality should be covered by automated
tests. `pytest` is used as testing framework. To run tests, run ``py.test`` in
the project root.

To generate test coverage info, use ``py.test --cov``. For this to work, all
tests should be run and the should be ran sequentially. E.g. when using
``pytest-xdist``, add ``-n0`` to run without xdist.

Tests are located in ``$pkg/tests``. For example, for the ``subproject``
project below, which only provides packages starting with
``project.subproject``, its file tree would look like::

    project
        __init__.py
        subproject
            __init__.py
            algorithms
                __init__.py
                algorithm.py
                algorithm2.py
            util.py
            tests
                __init__.py
                conftest.py
                test_algorithms.py
                test_util.py

There is only one ``tests`` package, under which all tests can be found. They
can be organised as you see fit, e.g. the following is fine too::

    tests
        __init__.py
        conftest.py
        algorithms
            __init__.py
            test_algorithm1.py
            test_algorithm2.py
        test_util.py

Documenting
-----------
Documentation is written as `reStructuredText`_ files (.rst) located in
``docs``. These get compiled by `Sphinx`_ into HTML, PDF and epub. When a
commit is added to the master on GitLab/GitHub, `Read the Docs (RTD) <rtd_>`_
is notified and starts a build of the documentation with Sphinx, after which it
hosts the result on its website, as the 'latest' version.  The Sphinx
configuration file is ``docs/conf.py``.

Read the Docs can be configured per project on https://readthedocs.io or for
most options (but not all) in ``readthedocs.yml`` in the project root.

To generate html documentation locally, run ``cd docs; make clean html``. The output
is in ``build/html``. The makefile also has targets for latex and other
formats.

Developing
----------
Work test-driven for the parts that will need testing eventually, this saves
the work of manually testing the code. You should run the tests occasionally
and avoid pushing commits to master with failing tests. It's okay to commit
with failing tests if you intend to rebase later to fix those commits.

Dependencies should at least be constrained to their major version to avoid
breakage in the future. After all, a project's major version is bumped iff
there is a backwards-incompatible change, which may break the project. For
example ``install_requires=['dep==1.*']``.

Tip: Instead of ``dep2>=1.1``, write ``dep2~=1.1``, this is equivalent to
``dep2>=1.1, dep2==1.*``.

To _`set up your local development environment`:

1. ``git clone $github_or_gitlab_url``
2. It's recommended to be in a Python virtual environment while developing.
   This hides all system/user-wide installed packages, amongst other things
   this helps test for missing dependencies in ``setup.py``.

   To create one::

       cd $project_root
       python -m venv venv  # create venv. Be sure to use the python version you want to test with, e.g. python3.5

   To enter the venv use ``. venv/bin/activate``, to exit ``deactivate``. When
   using Eclipse PyDev, you can configure a new interpreter on the project
   which points to the venv instead of the system-wide interpreter (which makes
   for better hinting of missing imports).
   
   It's a good idea to install ``wheel`` (speeds up installation by using
   binaries when available) and upgrade ``setuptools`` and ``pip``::

       pip install -U pip setuptools wheel

3. Install the project editably::

       pip install -e '.[all]'

   This also installs the dependencies. The -e option installs it in such a way
   that changes to the code will be reflected in the installed package, so you
   don't have to reinstall each time you want to use a script provided by the
   package. ``[all]`` tells pip to install the ``all`` extras, which in case of
   our ``setup.py`` contains the union of all extra dependencies.

   However, when changing ``install_requires``, ``extras_require`` or
   ``entry_points`` in ``setup.py``, you should reinstall (by rerunning the
   above command)

Code guidelines:

- Docstrings must follow
  `NumPy style <https://github.com/numpy/numpy/blob/master/doc/HOWTO_DOCUMENT.rst.txt#sections>`_.

- Be precise when specifying expected types in docstrings, e.g. in the
  ``Parameters`` section. E.g. consider using a type language like the one used
  in `Chicken Turtle Utilities`__.

- When using someone else's code or idea, give credit in a comment in the
  source file, not in the documentation, unless on a separate acknowledgements
  page.

__ http://chicken-turtle-util.readthedocs.io/en/4.1.0/type_language.html

Commit guidelines:

- Ensure ``py.test`` passes. If not, fix or mention tests are failing in the
  commit message (e.g. ``[failing]``, ``[broken]``).

- Remove trailing whitespace, unless it is significant. E.g. you cannot remove
  the trailing whitespace on the empty line in the string given to dedent::

      dedent('''\
          First line

          Last'''
      )

  By removing trailing whitespace one cause of git merge conflicts where
  semantically nothing has changed, is prevented. Command line git will
  highlight trailing whitespace. Most editors/IDEs can be configured to show
  trailing whitespace (Google ``$editor show trailing whitespace``).

Release checklist
-----------------
To release a new version to `PyPI`_:

1. Ensure your working tree is clean and you are on the master branch::

       git checkout master && git status

   Otherwise you risk including files/changes in the package uploaded to PyPI
   that are not in the git repo.

2. Ensure tests pass (``py.test``) in a fresh venv which does not rely on
   unreleased dependencies (i.e. no ``pip -e ...``).

3. Ensure ``docs/conf.py`` is in sync with ``setup.py``.  E.g. if you reference
   ``pytil`` with intersphinx and have pinned it in ``setup.py`` to
   ``pytil==5.*``, your ``intersphinx_mapping`` should contain::

       'pytil': ('http://pytil.readthedocs.io/en/5.0.0/', None),

4. Update changelog in ``docs/changelog.rst`` by reviewing commit messages since
   last release.

   The changelog is mainly intended to answer:

   - Which version do I need given that I use feature X?
   - Something is broken, could this be due to a recent update?
   - What's new? What features got added that I may want to use?

   Suggested sections:

   - Backwards incompatible changes:

     - Removal of anything that's part of the public interface, e.g. function
       of an API
     - Any other breaking changes to the public interface 

   - Enhancements/additions:

     - Addition of function, parameter, ... to public interface
     - Change that improves a function, ... of the public interface
     - Anything non-breaking that is part of the public interface

   - Fixes:

     - Bug fix to anything that affects the public interface. Briefly describe
       the symptoms of the bug and the fix.

   - Internal / implementation details:

     - switching to different libraries
     - non-trivial changes to project structure
     - anything related to tests
     - fixes that do not affect the public interface
     - anything not part of the public interface. This section is more so
       intended for developers. It's debatable whether this section is
       necessary, you might indeed just use the commit log.

5. Set the version for the release (semantic versioning: bump major iff
   backwards incompatible change, else bump minor if enhancement/addition, else
   bump patch; refer to the changelog)

   1. in ``setup.py``
   2. in the ``__init__.py`` of the package, e.g. for a subproject in
      ``project/subproject/__init__.py``

6. Generate documentation locally and review all changed areas (git diff of
   docs since last tag)::
   
       cd docs
       make clean html
       firefox build/html/index.html

   Common errors:

   - Formatting errors?
   - Dead links? (feel free to use a tool for finding dead links instead)
   - Unfinished parts?

7. Point documentation link to tagged RTD release by changing ``latest`` to
   ``$version``.

8. Push tagged commit with the changes::

       git commit -am $version
       git push
       git tag $version
       git push origin $version

9. Activate the version just released at `RTD <rtd projects_>`_, see the
   Versions tab.

10. Release to `PyPI`_::
   
       python setup.py sdist bdist_wheel
       twine upload dist/*

   - At first glance, looks correct
   - Homepage link is not dead
   - Documentation link links to tagged version at RTD

   Tip: ``~/.pypirc`` can be used to avoid retyping your password each time,
   chmod it to 0600

11. Bump patch and dev version (e.g. 4.0.0 -> 4.0.1.dev1, because 4.0.0.dev <
    4.0.0), and point documentation link back to latest RTD. Then
    ``git commit -am $dev_version && git push``.

Deploying
---------
In your development virtual environment, run::

    pip freeze > requirements.txt

Copy this to the production environment, create a new venv and then run::

    pip install -r requirements.txt

This reduces the odds of bugs due to having installed different versions of
dependencies. Alternatively, if you have high test coverage, you can just install and run the
tests. Also note that a venv cannot be moved (it uses absolute paths), you have
to recreate it on the new location.

Creating a new project
----------------------
To create a new project with this structure:

1. Install cookiecutter: ``pip install cookiecutter``.

2. Create the project from the cookiecutter template::

       git clone https://github.com/timdiels/python-project
       cookiecutter python-project/cookiecutters/simple
       rm -rf python-project  # when satisfied with the generated project

   and cd into the created directory (``$pypi_name``).

3. Initialize git and push first commit to GitHub/GitLab::

       git init
       git add .
       git commit -m 'Initial commit'
       git remote add origin $repo_url
       git push -u origin master

4. Enable documentation builds for the project on `Read the Docs <rtd
   projects_>`_.

   1. Import the project from GitHub/GitLab. Make an account and
      link it to your GitHub/GitLab if you haven't already.

   2. Go to ``Admin > Advanced settings`` and check "Install your project
      inside a virtualenv using setup.py install". This allows access to the
      project's code from within conf.py and the documentation (e.g.
      for using autodoc directives).

      As requirements file, enter ``rtd_requirements.txt``. RTD will ``pip
      install -r rtd_requirements.txt``. The ``rtd_requirements.txt`` of the
      template references the optional dev dependencies, so you can forget
      about this file and add doc dependencies to ``extras_require['dev']`` in
      ``setup.py``.

      If only supporting Python 3, change the interpreter to CPython3 (or
      similar implementation).

5. To start development, `set up your local development environment`_.

.. _pytest: https://pytest.org
.. _rtd: https://readthedocs.org
.. _rtd projects: https://readthedocs.org/dashboard
.. _pypi: https://pypi.python.org
.. _reStructuredText: http://docutils.sourceforge.net/docs/user/rst/quickref.html
.. _sphinx: http://www.sphinx-doc.org
